Fully moved to open source.

Merged MR on BiSheng to match first open-source version.
Merged first PR on GitHub to implement slicing and BiSheng changes.
Two more PRs: a small one with changelog and actual one with CallMacro stuff.
ndarray
All work is on GitHub on different branches.

Future: constexpr, linalg updates, add git submodule


Finished ndarray linking, added testcases.
That and 2 previous PRs are merged.
Yesterday, found 2 small bugs in compiler.py, submitted PRs for those.
Currently have 3 PRs on GitHub.
Reduce
Misc linalg simplification


Option 1:
Use existing function interface
Replace return op with yield op
How to do replacement?
Function is already compiled, how to steal its MLIR?

Option 2:
@inline function
Push linalg context onto the stack
- Replaces return with yield
- Look into how affine yield, scf yield are implemented?

Probably also want lambdas

Allow specifying and implicitly inferring init, dimensions, output type?

Bug: f32 + f64 results in f32.

Initial version: require user to specify everything, infer things later.

Syntax:

reduce(func, in, init=None, dimensions=None)

inline function
- basically done, writing testcases now, expect PR today

Review James's Triton PR:
- Many issues, we need better internal bookkeeping of Triton functions, I am very worried about name collisions
- Need to look into why tirton-ascend adds extra args
  - Try to predict or disable
  - If can't disable, at least parse MLIR into Python binding instead of parsing the string manually


Reviewed James's PR
Reduce, type checking, documentation (docstrings)
Broadcast

Finished reduce and broadcast, working example of SoftMax, still haven't had time to write testcases.
James's PR
Start write docs for onboarding
Set up stuff for interview
When are interviews?



Finished reduce, broadcast PR, ready for review.
4 PRs ready for review, 3 small one, 1 big one.
Onboarding document, draft PR.
Interviews

Dev doc, merged.
Code review.
Added better support for subclassing CompilationTarget and ToMLIR
MemRef address space, tensor empty, zeros.
Fixed scope for InlineFunction, open PR.


Help onboard
Update build instructions, open PR
Fixed a small bug with casting bool to Number which we discussed on Thursday w Kevin, merged
Trying to set up AscendTarget and bishengir-compile yesterday. Generally not satisfied, still need a lot of work on PyDSL AscendTarget. There are also issues with bishengir-compile, some of them are bugs: I discussed with Harley and I will submit issues for them. Others are just bishengir-compile doesn't support some things, which is not as important.
Concluded I we can probably use memref.copy and it should get lowered to hivm.hir.store if between different memory spaces.
Working upstream on big PR, tensor empty, cast, zeros, memref address space, memref cast, memref alloc.



Submit 4 issues about bishengir-compile.
Opened PR about tensor.empty, tensor.zeros, new memref.alloc syntax, address spaces. Address spaces have actual MLIR objects and aren't quite strings, so had to add support for that. Should work now.
Opened PR about memref.copy.
Reviewed all PRs not opened by me other than polybench.
Will look at Kavin's downstream PR.
Need to get lots of things merged.
Who is working on general AscendTarget?


Reviewed PRs both downstream and upstream.
Implemented HIVM address spaces downstream, pushed to a branch, but can't get a testcase to pass.
This should be the only remaining thing necessary for A5? Other than merging things.
For A3, it seems we don't have Python bindings...
Opened and merged one PR upstream to support vector type.

HIVM load, store, all elemwise unary, elemwise binary (27 ops in total)
Opened upstream PR for memref.cast, since seemed maybe useful for some of the perf mode things (and I also had a lot of this code written for like a month)
Started working on exit presentation, finish today or tomorrow?
Submitted and merged a 10 line PR upstream to stop compilation if a command fails.

